#summary Discussion on handling of SDMX Groups

## Groups

The SDMX Information Model supports a notion of Groups which group TimeSeries or Sections within an overall DataSet container. 

The notion of groups is slightly different in the two cases. In the TimeSeries case the Group is indicated by a GroupKey which serves to collect timeseries matching that partial key for the purposes of attaching attributes.

In the Section Case (SDMX IM, p.75) then Sections don't have full keys and the Group provides the rest of the Key as well as providing a place to attach attributes.

The IM model has a fixed containment hierarchy for Cross Sections:
{{{
XSDataSet > Group > Section > XSObservation
}}}
whereas with TimeSeries the GroupKey level is optional.

## Vocabulary extensions

We need to:
   * represent the containment structure
   * attach dimensions (in the case of Groups of Sections) and attributes to Groups
   * decide how attachment levels work and whether the Group attachments are replicated downwards

### Containment structure ###

We already have `sdmx:Group` as a grouping structure but no property for representing the containment hierarchy.

*Suggestion:* generalize the domain of `sdmx:slice` to include both `sdmx:DataSet` and `sdmx:Group`.  

[An alternative is introduce more specific relations `sdmx:group` (`sdmx:DataSet` -> `sdmx:Group`) and `sdmx:part` (`sdmx:Group` -> `sdmx:Section` or `sdmx:TimeSeries`).]

### Attaching dimensions and attributes ###

Nothing more needed. The domain of instances of `sdmx:ComponentProperty` is already open so we simply document that they can be attached to Groups to denote attributes and dimensions we are shared across all the TimeSeries/Sections (and enclosed observations) within the Group.

### Attachment levels ###

Our resolution to issue 12 already says that we can publish attributes at the attachment level called for in the DSD but that tools chains may replicate the information down to the observations for consumption purposes.

Currently Issue 12 proposes `sdmx:FlatDataSet` and `sdmx:TimeSeriesDataSet` to distinguish the flat and succinct cases. However, with Groups we have DataSets than contain Groups of either Sections or TimeSeries so something needs to change.

*Suggestion:* Simply rename `sdmx:TimeSeriesDataSet` to `sdmx:HierarchicalDataSet` and say a `sdmx:HierarchicalDataSet` can contain optional nested `sdmx:Group`s and attributes and dimensions will be attached at the level called for in the DSD.

@@ DSD notes


## Worked example
